# ExplainableAI_SHAP
Demonstration of XAI using SSD for Pneumonia recognition in Chest X-rays and SHAP for explaining the detection.

Pneumonia is an illness that causes inflammation of one or both the sacs of lungs in human beings. Though considered a common illness, accurate diagnosis of pneumonia is still considered a challenge. Chest radiograph (CXR) is a common tool used in this diagnosis. In a CXR, pneumonia is manifested as increased opacity. Deep learning algorithms are proving to be an efficient aid in healthcare segment with their ability in image analysis especially when it comes to detecting diseases or abnormalities from X-ray images. The objective of this research is to evaluate the appropriate combination of backbone models like MobileNet, ResNet-101 etc. with a choice of other learning parameters. The Tensor Flow Object Detection API provides multiple implementations of the SSD model built on the MobileNetV2 and Inception architectures. To fine-tune the network to detect spatial features of pneumonia, the steps were increased, and it showed corresponding improvement in performance metrics. The results revealed that SSD MobileNet V2 provides the best results. In healthcare, it is important to take a glass-box approach explaining the rationale behind a machine learning model’s decision output. I use SHAP algorithm to explore possible reasons behind the model classifying a given x-ray as pneumonia positive. With color coding of the pixels responsible for the x-ray classification as pneumonia positive or negative, we can not only aid the radiologist with classification and pneumonia detection, but also provide justification behind
each classification and thus helping in enhancing the confidence of healthcare experts in AI tools.
